Dear John,

Thank you so much for your considered reply. 

Firstly I must apologise, for the miscommunication. I am based at the Uni of Queensland in Australia, and we have a PhD researcher here from the Uni of Vermont. Nevertheless I would be interested to have contact with Magdoff.

I was very interested to read your thoughts, and the reception of the paper, thank you for extending them.

If you forgive me for the length of this communication and grant me the liberty of forwarding some thoughts in return: 

1. One thing that might be of interest is Odum's comment that he commonly found it would take 20 years before his ideas took hold in the academic and scientific communities and until that time he would often have to defend them. So your work in this area may also suffer the same fate. 

2. Personally I found your & Hannah's paper both a rigorous and enlightening treatment, "opening the door" to further work. I believe you are able to see the type of potential scientific synthesis of Marx and Odum that I was so excited by when I first contacted you. :)

3. As I intimated in my emails, I would be very interested to step through the door using Odum's approach to model the metabolic rift. Whilst it doesn't refer to "rift", Doherty's (2002) is perhaps the most interesting paper I have seen aiming to integrate emergy, history and geography. 

4. For your philosophical interest, as you noted you have been focusing on 1883 onwards. My Leibniz-Odum article was interested in mid 1600's onwards because I suspected both a continuity of ideas, but also some curious gaps in the literature. 

4.1 In this regard we can see that Odum (1994, p.264) locates the origin of energy as a measure of process heat with Mayer in 1842. However, if Valenti (1979) is right, it might be extended back to Leibniz & Papin and disputes around vis viva. I read Valenti's article after writing the Odum-Leibniz essay, it is a curious article for lack of in-line citations. 

4.2 Valenti argues that Liebniz's thermodynamics not more widely known because the British Royal Society conspired to suppress Papin & Leibniz's designs & patents, including a 1690 steamship. This might also cast more light on Godel's claim of a conspiracy to suppress Leibniz’s Characteristica Universalis, which I believe was to be founded in thermodynamics much like electronic schematics, but with a larger scale of application. Whilst such arguments need more research I read that yourself and Burkett (2008) have noted similar gaps with respects to the history and critiques of Marx & energetics ... perhaps Marx, and ecological economics literature was caught up in a grander conspiracy, and that any gaps in Marx's (or anyone's) work may be due to the suppressive legacy of the Royal Society rather than a lack of scholarship?

5. When I first contacted you I was attempting to read Odum with Marx's metabolic rift in mind. Whilst, as you and Hannah note, we have "metabolic rate of labor" in Scienceman (1992), I don't think we have "rift".

5.1 An unresolved question I have is around the importance of using electric circuits to simulate systems. For Odum, before the onset of digital computers, electric circuits were important because they implicitly obeyed the laws of energy. If you made a circuit that didn't obey, then the simulation wouldn't work. So if we come back to Odum's (1962) "analogous theory" - which I would read as *electric* "circuits of material use value and exchange value" - then are we looking for an analog for rift in electric circuits. 

5.2 Assume that we aim to look for an electric analog of rift. I believe that it might be located in Odum's use of the concept of "matching" (again see the 1962 ref). Odum does not give it a very good treatment, so I would go out on a limb and suggest that the electrical concept of "impedance mismatch" is the analogous concept for "metabolic rift". Both produce heat. When there is an impedance match, it maximizes power, and there is no, or minimal metabolic rift. Hence "maximum power", or the subsequent "maximum empower", might be the inverse of "metabolic rift", and we should be able to simulate it. 

5.3 In this way "metabolic rift" might refer to an empirical law (see Wikipedia ref), however further work needs to be done.

6. I will send Dr Sceinceman a copy of your paper. He complains a lot about his situation and lack of resources so may not respond. Fingers crossed he will. 

Thank you again for your reply. I personally thought that your article was a fantastic contribution and exploration of a potential enlightenment synthesis - perhaps justified by the direct intellectual lineage of Hutchinson and Vernadsky. 

Apologies again for the long reply.

Kind Regards,

Sholto



References:

Doherty, Steven J., Nilsson, Per Olov and Odum, Howard T. "Emergy evaluation of forest production and industries in Sweden." SLU, Inst. för bioenergi, 2002.

Foster, John Bellamy, and Paul Burkett. "Classical Marxism and the Second Law of Thermodynamics Marx/Engels, the Heat Death of the Universe Hypothesis, and the Origins of Ecological Economics." Organization & Environment 21.1 (2008): 3-37.

Odum, Howard T. "Ecological and General Systems." Colorado University Press, 1994.

Odum, Howard T. "The use of a network energy simulator to synthesize systems and develop analogous theory: the ecosystem example." Proceedings, Cullowhee Conference on Training in Biomathematics. 1962. pp. 291-297 

Scienceman, D.M. "EMVALUE AND LAVALUE." Paper presented to the Annual Meeting of
the International Society for the Systems Sciences. University of Denver, Denver, Colorado,
July 12–17, 1992. pp. 27–37.

Valenti, Philip. "Leibniz, Papin, and the Steam Engine." Fusion, 1979.

Wikipedia contributors, "Maximum power transfer theorem," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Maximum_power_transfer_theorem&oldid=673713024 (accessed October 5, 2015).




